---
layout: post
title: "The Beginner's Mind"
date: 2015-01-14 16:26:06 -0700
comments: false
category: work
author: "Erica"
---

An artist friend of mine, who had been visiting for a week or so, commented on my collection of books that she never saw me reading about art. And indeed, in the small piles that dotted tables and shelves around my house, the proportion of books about art in comparison to the books about social theory, feminism, urban planning, neuroscience, sexuality, and so on, was distinctly skewed toward the non-art subject. At the time I was in an MFA program focused on developing a social practice and so I thought, Of course I read about mostly other things. We are making work that we hope expands the field and speaks to a public beyond the art world. But this friend’s comment stuck with me and left me wondering (for nearly a year now) why it is that, though am an artist and want be seen as such, I seem to be drawn to do research about almost anything else. My best explanation is this. To me, art is the process (perhaps also the method) by which I can seek understanding, question the way that things are, and model new ways of being. This process can apply to any line of inquiry, in any discipline. Essentially, I feel that as a social practice artist what I am an expert in is challenging conventionality, stripping away assumptions, and forging new paths. It may sound a bit grandiose but I think choosing to pursue something like this is brave. Not having a clear path is nerve wracking. And yet, this is the way I see myself being able to create something meaningful beyond myself and my lifetime, and I can only imagine this as my life’s work. 


Though I sometimes feel I’m part of this tiny community of creative thinkers inside the art world, I have noticed a change afoot. Many of the principles that are central to the work we do in social practice art are being simultaneously understood and adopted in other arenas. I’ve noticed that business is starting to catch on. I ran across this article published by [Fast Company about what creates innovation in business](http://www.fastcompany.com/918964/beginners-mind). The author suggests that, rather than loads of experience, the ability to question the status quo, to see the big picture with fresh eyes -what the article calls The Beginner’s Mind- is actually what prompts most breakthroughs in science, technology, business, and yes, even art. While the article is geared toward a business-oriented audience, not necessarily the social context that I hope to engage with, this is exactly the kind of approach that I think could revolutionize any discipline to which it is applied. Many of these artists collaborations with business and large organizations have started popping up. Case and (philanthropic) point, [the Gates Foundation is collaborating with artists to promote their campaign for vaccinations](http://www.npr.org/blogs/goatsandsoda/2015/01/08/375598624/why-bill-gates-is-commissioning-fine-art). It seems that this may be the beginning of a major shift in the way organizations approach their work, that the creative mind, the questioning mind, can be really effective at cutting through the noise to reach people. Until recently, I think the assumption has been that art doesn’t have anything practical to offer, and I think that it’s starting to become apparent that it does.


It can be surprisingly difficult to discover all of your biases, your assumptions. I have been lucky enough to have been surrounded by colleagues and others who have pointed out some of these biases and assumptions in my writing and in my work. When they surface they still surprise me sometimes. But I’ve become quite good at digging deeper and deeper to find them in my myself, which in turn makes me better and better at finding them in others’ work.  So, when my friend pointed out that I was reading a lot about anything but art, my assumption had been that most artists research this way. I’m sure many do. But it caused me to look at the content of my reading with fresh eyes. And I realized that, though my method was art, what I am most interested in working on, based on a sample of my pleasure reading material, is the intersection between art and urban planning, the relationships between people, and their relationships to wider community and the built environment. Once I had this insight, it brought all of my past work into focus and it gave me a framework to use when developing new projects. This is, in small part, the story of how I came to the Catalyst CoLabs table. I am compelled to innovate unconventional approaches to planning that focus on relationships as the key source of knowledge and power. I want the work to be meaningful to us and to others we work with and to be implemented in a real, tangible way. And I believe that there is a collective consciousness that is ready and waiting for this to happen. 

